# Reflections on CVPR-2022

**Justin Dulay**

June 25th, 2022


Main points: 

- in-person is better 
  - people 
  - hybrid
  - workshops 
  - Expo
  - posters 
  - social events
- key lessons
  - finding that niche area
  - learning not to compare oneself too much

- things to consider ...
  - intense competition 
  - the paper that got retracted
  - personal goals 

### Introduction

And that's a wrap on CVPR-2022. While the conference operates annually, this is the first time the conference has conducting in-person activities since 2019, before the Covid pandemic. 

As an attendee of this conference, I'd like to offer my experiences with it --- similar to my post last year about my the previous one as my first conference in general. 

### In-Person Activity

(maybe insert some pictures of me / other people at the conference itself )

The in-person compoenent of CVPR impressed me. While I knew that over 5,000 people would be attending, the sheer crowds still impressed me upon my first encounters. I should also note that another few thousand attendees remained virtual --- of which nearly all talks provided Zoom links. As seen in my post about last year's all-virtual conference, I'm sure that these attendees felt the same. If you, reader, are one of the virtual attendees, I'd love to hear feedback about your experience from this year!

The workshops occuring on the first two days highlighted the sense of community and partnership within computer vision. With around 130 workshops, CVPR-2022 certainly held more than a single individual could attend. In my case in this world of options, I mostly attended the Visal Perception and Open World Learning workshop (where my advisor presented and my research most cloesly relates), the workshop on Fine Grain Visual Classification (of which a Kaggle competition I helped launch last year was presented), and the Workshop on Autonomous Driving (of which I have quite a bit of personal interest).

The main conference contained an Exposition of industies. 
(many dozen attended - maybe show a photo - send a number)
Companies such as Cruise, Zoox, and MotionAI displayed prototypes of their newest vehicless. Startups like ScaleAI brought lots of swag (including the infamous NeRF logo shirt) and free fancy coffee. Nearly all companies had a vested interest in recruting applied scientists or ML engineers. 
(maybe another personal note w.r.t. my relational experienecs with these)

